Blog ubiquitous language (#2)
gball-vmware/tanzu-dev-portal: content/blog/the-importance-of-ubiquitous-language/index.md

---
title: The Importance of Ubiquitous Language
description: ipsum sorem
date: '2022-12-05'
slug: ubiquitous-language
tags:
- Tanzu
- CI-CD
team:
- Greg Ball
---

> Good communication is one of the hardest things to be effective at. In relationships, in business, in teams, communication has and continues to be at the top of the list when it comes to what makes good ones, or bad ones.  Core to communication in general, is the ability to speak the same language.  Core to communication on a software team, this can be accomplished by speaking a language that is **_ubiquitous_**.  

Reviewer: Drop "Core to communication" in the last sentence.

> <span style="font-size: 50px; line-height: 50px">Ubiquitious</span>
> <br/>
> &nbsp;&nbsp;[yoo-**bik**-wi-_tuhs_] *adjective*
> 
> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;present, appearing, or **found everywhere**

How can a "ubiquitous" language help how we talk to our teams, our users, and the business (stakeholder and end-users)?  What do we need to do to discover it, and how should it be used to be most effective?  Before we dive into the answers to these questions, let's start with the basics.

## What is Ubiquitous Language?

> Ubiquitous language is a shared set of unambiguous vocabulary shared by all members and stakeholders of a product team.  Eric Evans talks "Ubiquitous Language" in his book [Domain Driven Design: Tackling Complexity in the Heart of Software](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0321125215). 

Reviewer: You can drop the first "shared" in the first sentence.

Some other characteristics of ubiquitous language are:
 
* terms have a single meaning within a given context (no exceptions)
* agreed upon by stakeholders, but not unilaterally defined by them
* evolves over time
* consists of domain terms, not technical ones 
  *  ("linked list", "hashmap", and "singleton" don't generally apear in a ubiquitous language)

There are a lot of "rules", so to speak, to defining and maintaining a ubiquitous language.  You may be asking yourself, "Why go through the effort?" In order to answer that question lets dig into how this could help you and your team deliver better outcomes to the businesses you support.

## The importance

> So why is it important that we all speak the same language?  For decades, huge organizations have adopted the "waterfall" mentality of distilling a business domain into a set of requirements by requirements writers, which were then translated by architects into develop high level architectures, which were then translated by senior software engineers into lower level software designs, which were then translated and implemented by software engineers on a number of teams throughout the organization.  Ultimately turning the software development process into a huge game of telephone.

Reviewer: Second sentence: ...architects into develop high... strike "into"

![img.png](./images/telephone.png)

Some domain terms may have made it from the requirements into the software but a large majority didn't.  This model primarily breaks down when there is an expectation of bidirectional, or skip-level, communication.  The reality we live in is that software development isn't as simple as requirements to architecture to design to code. In order to build software, especially in an "agile" or "lean" manner, especially on a balanced team, we empower all roles to engage with the business. It isn't just the PMs responsibility to learn and understand the business context, but everyone's. In order for this to happen effectively, individuals must communicate.  That communication goes a lot more smoothly if the words that the engineers are using have the same meaning as those translating the business domain to write stories.

> Let's use an example to illustrate what we are talking about.  Say that our team is writing a shopping application and our product manager have a user interview with someone from the business and write a single story that says something along the lines of:

Reviewer: Second sentence: update have to has and write to writes.

    int quantity;
}

class ItemList {
    List<Item> itemList;
    
    void add(Item item) {
        //add to list
    }
    
    void remove(Item item) {
        //remove from list
    }
    
    void removeAll() {
        //removes all items from list
    }
}
```

Although the implementation is technically correct, the terminology they used when writing the code has now given the developers a different vocabulary than other members of the team.  Now we have introduced some translations that need to happen:

* Product <--> Item
* Cart <--> ItemList
* ??? <--> Product
* "Checkout" <--> "Remove all items from cart"

What has been created here is a translation layer between the PM and the engineers, and worse, between engineers and the business. Requiring these translations will reduce efficiency of conversation, increase cognitive load, and possibly even break down trust between the engineering team and stakeholders.

In order to streamline this communication as much as possible we need to remove all unnecessary translations.  Remember, the word ubiquitous means "found everywhere", so lets see how this should best be accomplished in a software product on a balanced team.

## Usage

> In order for this language to be **found everywhere** it's important that it is defined and understood **by everyone**.  The best and easiest way to accomplish this is to ensure that all disciplines are involved in as much user-facing communication as is reasonable to stay productive.  It's not necessary that the entire development team for your application sit in every single user-interview, however on the other hand it is not of value for the development team to be involved in any.  Translation and context sharing has a cost, and one that should not be ignored.  Engineers, especially more senior ones, should know the business domain as well as the PM and designers.

Reviewer: I've read the second sentence for line 101 and I'm not sure what it means as written.

### Product

> Product Managers(PMs) and designers generally interface with the end-users and stakeholders on a more regular basis that engineering.  As advocates of those individuals, PMs generally tend to "speak the same language" as them.  Their ability to remain fluent in the business language can be relatively simple, however the business language isn't necessarily the same as the ubiquitious language for the team.  Since the ubiquitous language is an agreement with the entire team including the business, there are a few things they must do to remain good stewards of the ubiquitous language for the team.

Reviewer: First sentence: change that to than.

The first is prematurely translating terms or meanings so their team "understand" it better.  At the end of the day, it will be better to take the time to explain the business domain, terms, and meanings to every member of the team than to try to spare them or yourself.  Words mean things. They also often mean different things to different people with different perspectives.  Using the same terminology as the business, at least at first, will ensure that all perspectives have the same understanding of the underlying meaning of it prior to agreeing upon the correct term or meaning for that thing.

> The second thing PMs should avoid doing is being authoritative about the ubiquitous language.  In order for the language to be ubiquitous, _everyone_ must agree on the meaning.  The business, product, design, and engineering.  This means that there is room for negotiation on the terms being used.  Every term in the ubiquitous language will have clear meaning to the business, but that does not mean that it will have a 1:1 correlation (every time) with the terms used in the business.  For example the user of the online shopping business may use the word Shopping Cart consistently, however the team may determine for one reason or another to use the term "Cart" instead.  As long as the business clearly understands that "cart" is the same as "shopping cart" with no ambiguity, then it can used in place of "shopping cart" in the ubiquitious language.

Reviewer: You may want to pull on your note above about ubiquitous language evolving over time. That's a good reason to not be authoritative and keep them as placeholders for a conversation with the whole team and encourage sharing new information that might lead to the team agreeing an evolution has occurred.

When producing their artifacts, generally in the form of user stories, they should use ubiquitous language continuously and consistently.  An examples story may be:

> > As a customer, I want to be able to add products to my shopping cart, so that I can continue shopping until I'm ready to check out

Reviewer: PM nit-pick remove "be able to" from the **I want** statement.

Let's now explore how this user story may make its way into the designs for this application.

### Design

> As a frequent communicator with the business, being good stewards of the ubiquitous and business languages applies to deign the same way it does to product.  They additionally have a large artifact that they generate and maintain for use by the team, and that is the visual designs and user interviews. 

Reviewer: update "deign" in the first sentence to design

Reviewer: Last sentence could be more direct. Perhaps: They generate visual designs and insights from synthesized research to be used by the team.

> For both artifacts it is important to stay consistent with the ubiquitous language terminology.  By using this language these two artifacts are uniquely positioned to be one of the best methods to iterate and refine the ubiquitous language.  At the end of the day, the design files produced are consumed by both the business and the engineering team.  They are consumed by the business when validating user flows and UI designs, and they are used by the engineering team when reviewing, prepping for, and ultimately implementing the UI and the associated backend elements.  Because it is consumed by and influenced by both of these groups of people, it provides great opportunity to validate the ubiquitous language as well.  If engineers have questions about the terminology used in the design, they may try to make sense of things they see in the design using different terminology or concepts.  Its important that these terms and concepts are de-conflicted with designs so we don't create a translation layer.  Similarly, as the user interviews are happening, if the users are saying things like "this term doesnt make sense here", or "I would have expected this to be labeled x" it's a sign that the ubiquitous language being used isn't valid, and should be iterated upon.

Reviewer: Meaty paragraph. Consider making it more concise as this point is important. These artifacts are a rallying point for the team to have important conversations and agree on ubiquitous language (or unambiguous terms).  In turn, these artifacts are the most direct connection to validate your language with users interacting with your product.

If this validation is done effectively, it has a lot more power than just improving communication between members of the team.  It has validated the UI design and flow but also, to some extent, the software design of the domain objects.

> So we have created a design, that through several interviews, has also validated the ubiquitous language that we are going to be using.  Lets see now how this gets into the software.

Reviewer: More direct: So we have created a design and validated the ubiquitous language we are going to be using through several interviews.

In addition to over-generalization of terms, it's important to steer clear of technical jargon when it comes to your domain model and ubiquitous language.  As much as we would love to think everyone knows what a singleton or linked-list are, the unfortunate truth is that many do not.  So when it comes to naming major objects in our domain, its important to stay away from these terms.

Let's refactor the example shown earlier to show what a more correct solution would be when it comes to use of ubiquitous language.  

```java
class ShoppingCart {
    List<Pair<Product, Integer>> products;
    
    void add(Item item) {
        //add to list
    }
    
    void remove(Item item) {
        //remove from list
    }
    
    void checkout() {
        //removes all items from list
    }
}
```
Now the mapping looks like this

* Shopping Cart <--> Cart
* Product <--> Product
* "Checkout" <--> "Checkout"

> There may not always be a one-to-one correlation between terms that are used in the business uses on a day-to-day basis, but the words that do eventually make it into a ubiquitous language need to at least be unambiguously understood by the business. This language is essentially a contract between the business and all members of the team, and everyone should agree with that contract.  

Reviewer: Remove "uses" in the first sentence. "Eventually" is an optional word as well.

description: Exploration of Ubiquitous Language - What it means, how it helps, and how it is discovered and maintained.
date: '2022-12-15'
slug: ubiquitous-language
tags:
- team
- architecture
- "domain driven design"
team:
- Greg Ball
---

Good communication is one of the hardest things to be effective at. In relationships, in business, in teams, communication has and continues to be at the top of the list when it comes to what makes them good or bad.  Core to communication in general, is the ability to speak the same language.  On a software team, this can be accomplished by speaking a language that is **_ubiquitous_**.  

> <span style="font-size: 50px; line-height: 50px">Ubiquitous</span>
> <br/>
> &nbsp;&nbsp;[yoo-**bik**-wi-_tuhs_] *adjective*
> 
> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;present, appearing, or **found everywhere**

How can a "ubiquitous" language help how you talk to your teams, your users, and the business (stakeholder and end-users)?  What do you need to do to discover it, and how should it be used to be most effective?  Before you dive into the answers to these questions, let's start with the basics.

## What is ubiquitous language?

> Ubiquitous language is a set of unambiguous vocabulary shared by all members and stakeholders of a product team.  Eric Evans talks "Ubiquitous Language" in his book [Domain Driven Design: Tackling Complexity in the Heart of Software](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0321125215). 

Reviewer 2: When I first read this, I read unambiguous as ubiquitous and thought it was circular. Maybe use a synonym such as "clear" or "precise" instead to avoid confusion.

_Eric Evans talks "Ubiquitous Language" in his book_
should probably read
_Eric Evans talks about "Ubiquitous Language" in his book_

> Ubiquitous language is a set of unambiguous vocabulary shared by all members and stakeholders of a product team.  Eric Evans talks "Ubiquitous Language" in his book [Domain Driven Design: Tackling Complexity in the Heart of Software](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0321125215). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ubiquitous language is a set of unambiguous vocabulary shared by all members and stakeholders of a product team.  Eric Evans talks about "Ubiquitous Language" in his book [Domain Driven Design: Tackling Complexity in the Heart of Software](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0321125215). 
```

Software code, by necessity, is very structured and unambiguous.  For example, the same word in the same context in a block of code cannot have two different meanings because the compiler would be unable to determine how to compile the code to be understood by the computer.  However, language (especially English) can be highly ambiguous.  Take the following sentence for example.  

> The ball would have hit the bat if it were two inches higher.

The word "bat" in this sentence could have referred to a bat with wings or a bat made of wood.  The sentence is correct either way, and absent any additional context, you do not know the true meaning.

> By maintaining a one-to-one correlation of the language you use to describe the software you are building, with the actual software, you can utilize the un-ambiguous nature of the code to drive more ambiguity out of the language you use to describe it.  If you are able to create a way of communicating that is not ambiguous, your process of defining and building software can become a lot more efficient.  This can be accomplished by removing the need to ask questions like "what do you mean by that?", or "do you mean..." as frequently.  It also spares you the embarrassment of getting all the way from a user interview, to a user story, to code and then realizing, "Oh!  You meant this...".

Reviewer 2: "un-ambiguous" here should just read "unambiguous"

> By maintaining a one-to-one correlation of the language you use to describe the software you are building, with the actual software, you can utilize the un-ambiguous nature of the code to drive more ambiguity out of the language you use to describe it.  If you are able to create a way of communicating that is not ambiguous, your process of defining and building software can become a lot more efficient.  This can be accomplished by removing the need to ask questions like "what do you mean by that?", or "do you mean..." as frequently.  It also spares you the embarrassment of getting all the way from a user interview, to a user story, to code and then realizing, "Oh!  You meant this...".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By maintaining a one-to-one correlation of the language you use to describe the software you are building, with the actual software, you can utilize the unambiguous nature of the code to drive more ambiguity out of the language you use to describe it.  If you are able to create a way of communicating that is not ambiguous, your process of defining and building software can become a lot more efficient.  This can be accomplished by removing the need to ask questions like "what do you mean by that?", or "do you mean..." as frequently.  It also spares you the embarrassment of getting all the way from a user interview, to a user story, to code and then realizing, "Oh!  You meant this...".
```

!["Hi there you" -> "High fair food" -> "I know you" -> "I know kung fu"](./images/telephone.png)

Some domain terms may have made it from the requirements into the software but a large majority didn't.  This model primarily breaks down when there is an expectation of bidirectional, or skip-level, communication.  The reality is that software development isn't as simple as requirements to architecture to design to code. In order to build software, especially in an "agile" or "lean" manner, especially on a balanced team, you empower all roles to engage with the business. It isn't just the PMs responsibility to learn and understand the business context, but everyone's. In order for this to happen effectively, individuals must communicate.  That communication goes a lot more smoothly if the words that the engineers are using have the same meaning as those translating the business domain to write stories.

> Let's use an example to illustrate what you are talking about.  Say that your team is writing a shopping application and your product manager has a user interview with someone from the business and write a single story that says something along the lines of:

Reviewer 2: Let's use an example to illustrate what you are talking about.
**should read**
Let's use an example to illustrate what we are talking about.

> Let's use an example to illustrate what you are talking about.  Say that your team is writing a shopping application and your product manager has a user interview with someone from the business and write a single story that says something along the lines of:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's use an example to illustrate what we are talking about.  Say that your team is writing a shopping application and your product manager has a user interview with someone from the business and write a single story that says something along the lines of:
```

> As a customer, I want to add products to my shopping cart, so that I can continue shopping until I'm ready to check out.

The architect may then make some high level architecture decisions:
* A shopping cart should be implemented as a list of items that are comprised of a product and quantity
* A customer is an authenticated user
* Once the customer checks out, the items in the shopping cart should be removed

Now, being in the hands of the developer, they write something like this:

```java
class Item {
    Product product;
    int quantity;
}

class ItemList {
    List<Item> itemList;
    
    void add(Item item) {
        //add to list
    }
    
    void remove(Item item) {
        //remove from list
    }
    
    void removeAll() {
        //removes all items from list
    }
}
```

Although the implementation is technically correct, the terminology they used when writing the code has now given the developers a different vocabulary than other members of the team.  Now you have introduced some translations that need to happen:

* Product <--> Item
* Cart <--> ItemList
* ??? <--> Product
* "Checkout" <--> "Remove all items from cart"

> 

Reviewer 2: Nice! I like seeing this specific example. It makes it much more concrete what point you're trying to get across.

The second thing PMs should avoid doing is being authoritative about the ubiquitous language.  In order for the language to be ubiquitous, _everyone_ must agree on the meaning, the business, product, design, and engineering.  This means that there is room for negotiation on the terms being used.  Every term in the ubiquitous language will have clear meaning to the business, but that does not mean that it will have a 1:1 correlation (every time) with the terms used in the business.  For example the user of the online shopping business may use the word "shopping cart" consistently, however the team may determine for one reason or another to use the term "cart" instead.  As long as the business clearly understands that "cart" is the same as "shopping cart" with no ambiguity, then it can be used in place of "shopping cart" in the ubiquitous language.  The shortening of terms in the language like this one is a good example of how your ubiquitous language may change over time.  As long as the whole team is understanding the business and sharing that understanding with everyone, they can work together to settle on what is ubiquitous for them.

> When producing their artifacts, generally in the form of user stories, they should use ubiquitous language continuously and consistently.  An examples story may what you saw earlier:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When producing their artifacts, generally in the form of user stories, they should use ubiquitous language continuously and consistently.  Let's revisit the example story from earlier:
```
